docs: add best practices and a "manage charms" how-to (#1615)
canonical/operator: docs/howto/manage-logs.md

> (how-to-manage-logs)=

Reviewer: ```suggestion
(manage-logs)=
```

# How manage logs

> See first: {external+juju:ref}`Juju | Log <log>`, {external+juju:ref}`Juju | How to manage logs <manage-logs>`

Ops configures Python logging and warnings to end up in the Juju log, and the

> charmcraft profiles provide a `logger` object for your charm to use at the top

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Charmcraft profiles provide a `logger` object for your charm to use at the top
```

of your `src/charm.py` file. This lets you use the Juju `debug-log` command to
display logs from the charm. Note that it shows logs from the charm code, but
not the workload.

> Use the provided logger to log information relevant to the Juju admin. For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Use the provided logger to log information relevant to the charm user. For
```

example:

```python
import logging
...
logger = logging.getLogger(__name__)

class HelloOperatorCharm(ops.CharmBase):
    ...

    def _on_config_changed(self, _):
        current = self.config["thing"]
        if current not in self._stored.things:
            # Note the use of the logger here:
            logger.info("Found a new thing: %r", current)
            self._stored.things.append(current)
```

```{tip}
The default logging level for a Juju model is `INFO`. To see, for example,

> `DEBUG` level messages, you should change the model configuration.

Reviewer: I'd just link to https://canonical-juju.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/3.6/user/howto/manage-logs/ (which will soon be updated cf. https://github.com/juju/juju/pull/19177 Although, this doc already links there at the top of the doc, so I'm wondering if this tip is needed at all.

Author: I wondered about just dropping it. It should probably link to the [configure](https://canonical-juju.readthedocs-hosted.com/en/3.6/user/howto/manage-logs/#configure-the-logging-level) section rather than the top level, although I think I would need to do a PR in Juju to make that possible.

If you have 'seen first' as suggested, then you shouldn't need the tip, because you learnt it in the Juju doc. It's also fairly common practice that the default logger level is higher than `info` (often it's `warning`). So perhaps it should just go.

The main reason I kept it is that I feel like `juju debug-log` is both (a) incredibly useful for figuring out what's going wrong when you're developing a charm, and (b) incredibly difficult to use as a charm developer in the default configuration because there's so much content that isn't relevant to what you're doing.

What about replacing this tip with something more specific to charm development? Something like:

````
```{tip}
In addition to logs from your charm, `juju debug-log` contains a wealth of information about everything happening in your model. To focus on what's happening in your charm, use:

<some config here that works well>
```
````

I'd want to think more about exactly what that might be, and maybe ask around, but, for example, it could be limiting the output to what your charm produces, at debug and higher. Or maybe just excluding some of the noisier Juju log producers that are probably not useful for a charm developer.

Reviewer: No strong feelings here. I believe you're in the best position to judge how useful it would be at this point. I usually try to be strictly non-redundant but have also caught myself breaking this rule precisely for the sort of reasons you bring up -- added emphasis or convenience.

```

> See more: [`logging`](https://docs.python.org/3/library/logging.html)

```{admonition} Best practice
:class: hint

Capture output to `stdout` and `stderr` in your charm and use the logging and

> warning functionality to send messages to the Juju admin, rather than rely on

Reviewer: ```suggestion
warning functionality to send messages to the charm user, rather than rely on
```

(manage-logs)=
# How manage logs

> See first: {external+juju:ref}`Juju | Log <log>`, {external+juju:ref}`Juju | How to manage logs <manage-logs>`

Ops configures Python logging and warnings to end up in the Juju log, and the
Charmcraft profiles provide a `logger` object for your charm to use at the top
of your `src/charm.py` file. This lets you use the Juju `debug-log` command to
display logs from the charm. Note that it shows logs from the charm code, but

> not the workload.

Reviewer 2: > Note that it shows logs from the charm code, but not the workload

TIL! I think that explains something that confused me weeks ago... :grin:
